# Draft of the introduction chapter

Space is sedimented, closed, open, multiple, layered, iterative, plural and mobile. How does one constitute an **alternative index** as a spatial practice of what a civic cathedral has been and could become. This book is a spatial practice in re-orientating Coventry Cathedral towards a global planetary connectedness in a multiculturally superdiverse city. Material archives become spinning tops for innovating ongoing collaborative future spatial practices; reflecting on what else could be imagined in the space of the cathedral. Live material archives, of paper, rock, soil, acorn, sound and image, are activated as catalysing resources, for re-visiting pasts often not fully registered. Possibilities for experimentation and for thinking outside of the box are ignited. Co-journeying forms the spine of creative collective propositions, sharing what has been, whilst building practices of what could be. I have spiralled down the staircase to the archives sitting under the nave of Coventry Cathedral, coming up for the air space offered by receptive collaborators who expand the space of possibilities through their generous curiosity.

Coventry Cathedral has notably been studied for the modernist architecture and the works of established artists, such as Graham Sutherland’s large tapestry, which was dyed and woven by women in a French village. Or John Hutton’s engravings of saints and angles on the West Screen, with the builders referring to one such figure as a footballer. I draw on a heterodoxy of spatial practices, alongside a carrier bag of sparky stories that sit on the side of the usual epic stories, as suggested by Ursula Le Guinn. The engagement meddles with how the big, repeated stories of the cathedral are framed, and more so develops an index of what is out of the frame, by re-hearing the very here. To **hear the here**, with a different accent to the assenting sound of “Hear Here” in political chamber.

To this engagement I bring my experience of working on innovative methods on space, dialogue, multiculturalism and de-coloniality whilst juggling being a critical outsider, with a shape shifting relationship on the inside. I approached this project as a transversal interlocutor (Yuval-Davis, 1999), moving between the lines of academia and the cathedral, undertaking the journey of becoming a partially trusted critical sympathetic eye. This project is not researching the cathedral from a distance, rather it is looking inside the institution, by finding clues and enchantment in the archives, as well as through making the familiar strange (Back and Sinha, 2018). 

This project calls up site specific propositions for engaging with what is left on the side line of the stories regularly told about Coventry Cathedral. Taking what is peripheral to the ordering of stories and of materials in the archives, this project opens up an alternative de-tour of site-specific relationships. Specific kinds of matters of care (Puig de la Bellacasa, 2017), are found in the fertile grounds of the archives, as I rummage in boxes, filing cabinets and files. By reading both along and against the grain (Stoler, 2008) of matter that matters for other reasons, I squirrel between regularised indexicalities. The task of focusing on what is out of the frame, enfolds multiplying leads that spiral in and around the maps of the cathedral. Rock, Acorn, Soil, Industry, Unity, Study, Sight and Sound, are assembled in the book, to become alternative trailing maps of the cathedral. An indexical map operates as an activating device, navigating reader visitors to hear the here from the peripheral edges. There is a re-ordering with alternate directions of travel. Generating a labyrinth diagram from the established order, by reading and working *Along the Archival Grain* (Stoler, 2010). Engaging in what Tina Campt has termed *Listening to Images* (2017) and texts to decipher the atmospheres and experiments of past practices, which come from making the archive a working home (Hartman, 2018).

This project approaches experiments as **spinning tops from the past**, spiralling towards what the civic life of a cathedral can become. Coventry Cathedral is an internationally recognised post-war modernist architectural site, with changing contours of peace and reconciliation. The word experiment runs throughout the archives, appearing in different constellations, in spatial arrangements of music, art, drama, ecology, theology, civic and global relations.  Here, experiments from the past are treated as propositions for prompting imaginative possibilities. The spatial practices involve rooms, letters, models, rock, acorns, animals, gardens, photos and conversations constituting a ‘living archive’ (Hall).  Stretching what could be possible, as well as what was possible, I look back at ‘experiments’ in order to spark up the could be, amongst sedimented im/possibilities. 

Making space for ‘speculative futures’ (Wilkie et al, 2017) and afro-futurism (Eshun, 1998) this project has involved a series of exchanges. Academics, artistic and community heritage practitioners have responded generously to the question -What can a cathedral become in planetary multicultural contexts? Experimental thinking and practices will be facilitated through contact with archives in the cathedral, as well as specific architectural points in Coventry Cathedral. Different types of materials are activated anew, forging ‘archives of feelings’ in between collaborators, to initiate together. An inter-disciplinary sense making for how a ‘living archive’ develops connections on the move with people and materials as infrastructure, shifting towards a cathedral in the making, interwoven in a palimpsest of relations and materials. Provocations (Pangrazio 2017) form the grounds for future collaborations so that the experiments proposed can actually be fleshed out.

Institutions are complex places with multiple strands and strains jostling alongside each other. Specific leaders and teams have been highly receptive to steering to unknown or overlooked peripheral aspects of histories. The Events and Engagement Teams, with their respective Canon’s, have forged receptive links with my intervention and presence. There is an interest in delving into the archives as a resource for generating bold thinking on how to connect with diverse populations in the city through creative projects facilitating the art of dialogue and collaboration. This project works with this challenge by investigating the cathedral archives to both register multicultural experiments, as well as to use what is found in the archives to innovate new planetary contact zones. Particular teams in the cathedral sought, in their partnership with me, to open up the narratives of the space to a plurality of journeys and perspectives. 

The cathedral has developed an Events Manifesto which includes the prioritisation of collaborations with a super diverse city population in a sustained way. Some sections of the institution are searching and pitching for ways to experiment with initiatives that interrupt accepted practices, whilst taking inspiration from the visionary programme of activities during the sixties and seventies, many of which remain invisible to cathedral staff, as well as to the general public. Hence it is stated: ‘We want to maintain the spirit of our original event programme by continuing to celebrate ideas, excellence and new thinking. This legacy will influence our programming choices.’ (2020: 8) The cathedral team are seeking to mobilise fresh new thinking, with an ethos for “the cathedral space to be transformative and used to its fullest potential." (2020:9). 

This project reads the manifesto as a prompt, an invitation to bring along brave and bold ideas, as multiscalar initiatives, respond to the architectural space and narratives of the cathedral. The cultivation of new stories is a central objective of the manifesto, through programming and co-curation, with the many who don’t automatically see the cathedral as their civic space. 

Emergent methods for: dwelling on uncomfortable topics; re-routing the inhabitation the cathedral; facilitating multi-lingual assemblages; and altering spatial manifestations of listening, through sustained practices and relationships. A growing connecting mesh of relations via spatial, with different types of tension in the spectrum of linking wires, alters the indexicality of space. Operating with the notion of slow and embedded change, re-visiting what has been enacted in the past has springboarded innovative approaches to generate the ‘arts of contact zones’ (Pratt, 1991). Collaboration as an evolving call-and-response develops through a network of invitations to engage both with site-specific elements and paper archives. 

The new modernist cathedral sits in the middle of the city centre, side-by-side with the ruins of the old cathedral from WW2 bomb damage, as a symbol of conflict and reconciliation. Several academic projects have studied the architectural history of the place. The relationship to the city was designed by Basil Spence into the fabric of the building, through the circular glass building of the ‘Chapel of Industry’, which looks on to a developing and changing city. The cathedral manifesto, emphasises that ‘Brick by brick, we were built for the people of Coventry’ (2020: 9), whilst recognising the discrepancy between people who migrated to the city at the time of the building in the sixties and their sense of connection to the place. Many of the workers who physically built the cathedral were from the colonies, though their labour and presence is hidden in the histories of this iconic place in the city. Alongside more recent waves of global migration, the cathedral has attempted to embrace the City of Sanctuary status granted to Coventry. Nonetheless, the team are aware of the sustained work that needs to be undertaken, in order to shift who feels they belong, as well as how they belong. Of course, there is no easy or quick fix.

Tensions within and between communities of race, faith, class, gender and sexualities, are part and parcel of what the post-colonial feminist Lata Mani has called Contentious Traditions (2008). Inter-cultural exchanges are full of Discrepant Multiculturalisms (2000) as the race theorist Barnor Hesse has stated. ‘Communities’ are not homogenous (Amin, 2002), but full of what Avtar Brah, in Cartographies of a Diaspora (1996), identifies as criss-crossing solidarities and struggles. The move to address colonial histories through processes of interpretative de-colonisation (Verges, 2020), involves working with entangled relations across time and space, moving us towards possibilities for hospitality (Diprose, 2012) and a cosmopolitan art of listening (Back, 2007), amidst what the cultural theorist Paul Gilroy (2004) refers to as ‘post-colonial melancholia’ after Empire. A play of vernaculars and arts of dialogue (Portelli, 1997), offer the potential to develop what Leila Ahmed refers to as ‘Affective Communities’ (2006). It is in the plural site-specific play of space, as noted in the Production of Space (1991) by the theorist Henri Lefebvre that ‘new situations’ can emerge, including what Gilroy refers to as ‘convivial multiculturalism’ (2004).

Working from the emergent, attentive to the moving grounds, methodologies, a series of workshops, public events, and a podcast series titled ‘Hear Here’ dwells on past spatial practices, to spur on new possibilities. New inhabitations mobilise a rich interdisciplinary body of scholarship on spatial encounters by experimenting with a plurality of methods of creative engagement. move with the sociological imagination as C W Mills termed it, both inside and outside the academy. As stated by Mills, the questions a sociologist asks, pull together public and private issues, moving between the macro and micro, with the imagination roaming in different libraries and stocks of knowledge to bring depth and understanding to the problem. The challenge presented by the wish to open up institutional narratives and to foster different connections to an established institution, by shifting between the local, global and planetary, requires knowledge of creative practices, which overlap between cultural forms of public engagement. The questions underlying the project is being are addressed by a conceptual framing that draws on different disciplines.

The material arrangement of the book, spatially and temporally, moves through a series of instalments of interlinked writings, podcasts and short videos. Collaboration and experimentation are braided (Kimmerer, 2013) through each of these inter-connected pieces. A call-and-response, not only in ‘art of dialogue’ as noted by Alessandro Porteilli The serial format is inspired by the Sukhdev Sandhu’s *Night Haunts* (2010), which was released over the duration of several months, as ethnographic observations with night workers in London, for [the artistic website hosted by Artangle](https://www.artangel.org.uk/project/night-haunts/), before it became a widely read book, published by Verso. Les Back’s method for his book *Academic Diary* (2016) has additionally informed the scale and tempo of the writing, which was written as a blogpost, leading up to the first book published by Goldsmiths Press.

## References 

Les Back (2007) *The Art of Listening*, Berg Publishers. 

Les Back & S Sinha (2018) *Migrant City*, Routledge 

Avtar Brah (1996) *Cartographies of Diaspora: Contesting Identities*, Routledge. 

Tina Campt (2017) *Listening to Images*, Duke University Press Coventry Cathedral (2020) 

Events Programme: Audience Development and Communication Strategy, published by Sarah Chambers Consulting. 

Ann Cvetkovich (2003) *An Archive of Feelings: Trauma, Sexuality, and Lesbian Public Cultures*, Duke University Press. 

Rosalyn Diprose (2012) ‘Building and Belonging Amid the Plight of Dwelling’, *Angelaki* 16, 4, (59-72) 

Kodwo Eshun (1998) *More Brilliant Than the Sun: Adventures in Sonic Fiction*, Quartet Books 

Leela Gandhi (2006) *Affective Communities*, Duke University Press. 

Paul Gilroy (2004) *After Empire: Melancholia or Convivial Culture*, Routledge. 

Yasmin Gunaratnam and Les Back (2015) ‘Every Minute of Every Day: Mobilities, Multiculture and Time’, in G. Robson (ed) *Digital Difference: Social Media and Intercultural Experience*, Cambridge Scholars Publishing 

Donna Haraway (2016) *Staying With The Trouble: Making Kin In The Chtulucene*, Duke University Press. 

Saidiya Hartman (2018) ‘On working with archives’,  *The Creative Independent*, 18 April. Available at: https://thecreativeindependent.com/people/saidiya-hartman-on-working-with-archives